Discussion Questions:
1. By all accounts, Paterno, Spanier, Schultz, and Curley were honorable men who led
decent lives. Many people criticized them for protecting the Penn State brand at the
expense of children in how they handled the Sandusky scandal. Is this fair criticism?
Why or why not?
2. By 2001, Paterno had been at Penn State for 51 years and clearly loved the institution.
Graham Spanier had been on the Penn State faculty from 1973-1982 and had been its
President since 1995. Tim Curley was born and raised in State College, PA., went to Penn
State as a student, and then worked in the athletic department, where he rose to the
top of the organizational chart. Gary Schultz graduated from Penn State in 1971 and
then worked there for forty more years. In other words, all four men were heavily
invested in the university. They clearly understood the immediate, tangible, and
significant harm that a sexual molestation scandal involving one of the campus’s most
visible and beloved figures would have upon Penn State’s image, and its brand. On the
other hand, the four men did not know Sandusky’s victims. They did not know their
names. They did not know their faces. And the evidence seems to indicate that they
went to great lengths not to know anything about the victims. The victims must have
seemed very abstract to Paterno, Spanier, Curley, and Schultz. Could the bias of the
tangible and the abstract have played a role in the bad decisions made by these good
men?  Explain your conclusions and the reasoning behind them.
3. In 1991, if the four men had reported to the police or to child welfare authorities the
McQueary information, it seems very likely that (in light of what had happened in 1998)
they would have had a public scandal threatening damage to the Penn State brand. Is it
possible these men thought to themselves: “Maybe he didn’t do it. And if he did it,
maybe he did it only once. And if he did it more than once, maybe the victims won’t
complain publicly. And if they do complain, maybe no one will believe them. And if they
do believe them, maybe this will happen off in the future and be the next president’s (or
coach’s, or athletics director’s) problem.” Could such thinking have kept the problem at
an abstract level in the men’s minds rather than a tangible reality? Do you agree or
disagree? Why or why not?
4. Harvard’s Eugene Soltes has found that white collar crime tends to occur more
frequently when the perpetrators have no personal contact with the victims of their
wrongdoing. This reduces their feelings that they are harming others and, therefore,
that they are doing anything wrong. Does this finding have relevance for the Sandusky
scandal? Explain your reasoning.


Case Study – The Sandusky Scandal - Page 4 of 5

a. Do you think the “Penn State Four” might have acted differently if they had
met any Sandusky’s many victims? If so, how?
b. Would these men have acted the same had they known the victims? Or if the
victims had been their own children? Explain.
5. What other behavioral ethics concepts in this series might have had an impact here?
What about the self-serving bias? What about role morality? How might these biases
have factored into the men’s choices and actions. Explain.