Discussion Questions:
1. In what ways is role morality evident or not evident in the case of Kim Davis? Explain. Do you
think role morality would be ethically permissible in this situation? Why or why not?
2. In what ways is role morality evident or not evident in the case of the social worker? Explain. Do
you think role morality would be ethically permissible in this situation? Why or why not?
3. Do you think mental health providers should be able to decline to provide services to
individuals whose lifestyle they find morally wrong? Should clinicians have the freedom to
select who they wish to treat on the basis of their own values or beliefs? Why or why not?
4. Is it fair to a client if mental health services are provided by a social worker who harbors
animosity or condemnation toward the client on the basis of the client’s sexual orientation?
Would the client be better served by a clinician who did not harbor such beliefs? Why or why
not?
5. Should clients be asked to identify their sexual orientation upon admission to mental health
facilities so that appropriate provider assignments may be made? If the client does not divulge
that he or she is gay until treatment has begun, does it risk harm to the client if a transfer to
another therapist is made? On the other hand, does it risk harm to the client to continue work
with a clinician who has antipathy toward him on the basis of his sexual orientation? Explain
your reasoning.
6. What should be done in cases where it is not possible to refer the client in the above scenario
to another therapist due to limited staffing options, such as in rural mental health clinics?
Explain your reasoning.
7. In the Davis case, officials of the Mormon Church asserted that the duty to obey the law
supersedes any religious objections that Mormon county clerks may have to gay marriage. Do
you think requirements included in the National Association of Social Workers Code of Ethics to
advocate for oppressed minority groups outweigh sincere religious objections that may be held
by some social workers? Why or why not?