Discussion Questions:

1. It is possible that although Lochte’s “overexaggeration” occurred several hours after the
incident, intoxication might have played a role in the misstatement. Do you think that
loss aversion also played a role?  If so, please explain how and why.
2. Have you ever been tempted to lie in order to cover up a mistake (moral or otherwise)
that you have made? Do you understand how Lochte might have felt? Explain.
3. In their book on scandals in college sports, Harper and Donnor wrote:
“People in most professions, not just college sports, would go to great lengths to save
their jobs. However, it is plausible that the higher a person’s salary is, the more
desperate and determined she or he is to retain that high paying job. …The loss of a
million-dollar job surely requires significant lifestyle changes—who wouldn’t protect
that?”
Ryan Lochte had several million dollars of endorsement deals with Speedo, Ralph Lauren
and other sponsors. Is it possible that he might have “overexaggerated” to avoid losing
those revenue streams? Explain your reasoning.
4. It appears that outrage was directed at Lochte primarily because of his apparent lie
rather than because of his admittedly drunken behavior. Is this evidence supporting the
common viewpoint that “the cover-up is worse than the crime”? Why or why not?


Case Study – LochteGate - Page 3 of 4

5. Professor William Earnest has written that “[t]he number one reason people lie, still, is
to avoid punishment and embarrassment.” Is this statement consistent with your
experience? If so, how?
6. Jose Canseco, a famous baseball player who eventually admitted to using steroids to
“bulk up” in violation of Major League Baseball’s guidelines wrote:
“Why do athletes choose to expose themselves to the risks and uncertainties [of steroid
use]? I wish the answer was simple. In most cases the answer is surprisingly not for the
fame and the money. While some may take them hoping to get an advantage, the plain
answer is that most do it just to survive in their sport….They are not All-Stars and are
doing it just to stay in the game and pay the bills.”
In other words, Canseco is saying that most of these athletes cheated not to gain fame
and fortune, but to avoid losing their jobs. Does this sound like loss aversion to you?
Explain your reasoning.
7. How can you best prepare in order to prevent feelings of loss aversion leading you to
make a crucial moral mistake? Discuss.