Ethical Pitfalls in Action
If you are like most people, you want to be a good person, and you want others to think of you as a
good person. You also think of yourself as a good person. But (again), if you are like most people, you
can think of moral mistakes you have made. Maybe you wish you could have a “do-over” regarding
some (or many) of these ethical missteps. Why is it that you – an essentially good person – have made
these moral errors? Why is it that all of us make these moral missteps and stumble into doing unethical
things?
Well, a big emphasis of behavioral ethics is on this simple question: Why do good people do bad
things? Behavioral ethics is the science of moral decision-making, which explores why and how people
make the ethical (and unethical) decisions that they do. The videos in this series address this
fundamental question by focusing on some of the influences that can adversely affect our moral
decision-making. This is far from an exhaustive list; there are a great many pressures and influences
that affect our thinking, choices, and actions in the moral realm.
These videos examine:
• Obedience to authority: the tendency we have to wish to please those in charge, like managers
and coaches.
• The conformity bias: the tendency we have to take our cues for proper behavior in most social
contexts from the actions of others, such as friends and teammates.
• The self-serving bias: the tendency we have to gather information, process information, and
even remember information in a manner that advances our self-interest.
• The overconfidence bias: the tendency we often have to be overconfident regarding our own
abilities, including in the area of moral decision-making.
• Framing: the tendency we have to be overly influenced by things that are in our frame of
reference when we make moral decisions, but insufficiently influenced by factors that we have
omitted (maybe unintentionally) from our frame of reference.
• Incrementalism: the slippery slope—the frequent failure we have to notice that ethical
standards are being eroded a little bit at a time.
• Role Morality: the tendency we have to use different ethical standards as we play different
roles in life and society.
• Loss Aversion: the tendency we have to prefer
avoiding losses to gaining rewards.
• Tangible & Abstract: the tendency we have to
be impacted more by vivid, tangible, and
contemporaneous factors than by factors that
are removed from us in time and space.
Case Study – Ethical Pitfalls in Action - Page 1 of 5