The Central Park Five
In 1989, a young woman jogging in New York’s Central Park was raped and beaten nearly to death.
This high-profile attack upon a white investment banker in the heart of the city was quickly called the
“crime of the century.” There was intense public pressure to solve the case and, indeed, the police
quickly arrested five young (14 to 16 years old) men who were black and Latino. They had been part of
a larger group of young men harassing passersby in another part of the park.
After intense interrogations ranging from 14 to 30 hours in length, four of the five confessed to the
crime. The five were charged with the attack. Importantly, (a) the boys soon recanted their
confessions which they blamed on police coercion, (b) no physical evidence linked the young men to
the crime, (c) no physical evidence indicated that there was more than one attacker, (d) the semen
found in the victim did not match any of the young men, and (e) the four confessions were inconsistent
with each other and with the physical evidence from the crime scene. Nonetheless, the young men
were convicted and sent to jail. Real estate developer Donald Trump called for their swift execution in
a full-page newspaper ad.
Thirteen years later, Matias Reyes, who was serving a life sentence for murder, confessed to the crime.
Indeed, his DNA matched the semen recovered from the victim. His was the only semen recovered
from the victim. The attack on the jogger was similar in M.O. to his other rapes, none of which
involved any other perpetrator.
Eventually the Central Park 5 settled a wrongful
conviction lawsuit with the City of New York for
$41 million.
However, the indisputable and overwhelming
evidence of their innocence did not change the
minds of:
• The lead prosecutor, who claimed that the five young men were indeed still guilty and that
Reyes was simply an additional perpetrator—an “unindicted co-ejaculator.”
• The head detective, who said: ‘This lunatic [Reyes] concocts this wild story and these people fell
for it.”
• Donald Trump who in 2013 tweeted regarding Ken Burns’ award-winning documentary on the
Central Park 5’s innocence: “The Central Park Five documentary was a one sided piece of
garbage that didn’t explain the horrific crimes of these young men while in park.”
• The second chair lawyer in the prosecution who in 2018 still finds the taped confessions “pretty
compelling” notwithstanding their inconsistencies and the fact that of the first 325 DNA
exonerations in the U.S., 27% involved false confessions.
Case Study – The Central Park Five - Page 1 of 3