Discussion Questions:
1. Many friends and family members will swear that Starr, McCaw, and Briles are, indeed,
fine Christian men. Hundreds of former players will swear to coach Briles’ character.
Briles, Starr and McCaw were confident in their conduct. Briles said: “I like the way
we’ve handled [the scandal] as a university, an athletic department, and a football
program.”  Yet they, especially Briles and McCaw, seem to have made serious moral
mistakes in their handling of this scandal. Could the overconfidence bias provide a
partial explanation for why these good men made bad decisions? Explain.
a. Could their confidence in their own character and religiosity have subverted
careful moral decision making? Discuss.
2. The video quotes behavioral psychologists Tenbrunsel and Bazerman as writing:
“It’s likely that most of us overestimate our ethicality at one point or another.  In effect,
we are unaware of the gap between how ethical we think we are and how ethical we
truly are.”
a. Do you see evidence of that in the Baylor situation? If so, what?
b. Have you seen evidence of it in your own life? Explain.
c. Are you confident of your own moral character?
d. Have you ever made ethical choices that, in retrospect, appear to have been
poor ones? How might you have been subject to the overconfidence bias
yourself?
3. When people focus too much on one part of the picture, other aspects may fade from
view. It seems clear that Starr, McCaw, and Briles were determined to lead Baylor to
football prominence. They correctly surmised that athletic success on the field would
lead to a financial bonanza for the school—new stadiums, new buildings, record alumni
donations. These goals were set and met, but at a terrible price it seems. The moral
standards that should have guided the recruiting of football players and the
investigations into their wrongdoing faded into the background for these three men
who were focused on other accomplishments. Could ethical fading [for a brief definition
of this concept, watch: https://ethicsunwrapped.utexas.edu/glossary/ethical-fading]
also have played a role in the poor decision making that facilitated this scandal? Explain
your reasoning.
4. When goals conflict, something has to give. In the case of Baylor, it was arguably the
safety and welfare of the campus’s female student population. With Starr, McCaw, and
Briles being single-mindedly committed to attaining football success (and its attendant
benefits), they consciously or unconsciously disregarded and disrespected their
campus’s young women. Explain how conflicts of interest [for a brief definition, watch:
https://ethicsunwrapped.utexas.edu/glossary/conflict-of-interest] can give rise to poor


Case Study – Cover-Up On Campus - Page 5 of 6

ethical decision making. Do you think conflicts of interest may have played a role in this
case? If so, how?
5. Most people have a sort of mental scoreboard in their heads where they compare their
image of themselves as good people with their actual deeds. So, when we do something
we’re not exactly proud of, we will often seek opportunities to help others so we can get
our mental scales back in balance. This is called moral compensation. Unfortunately, the
reverse is also true. When we feel we have done especially well, we often give ourselves
permission to do something a little wrong. Our internal moral scoreboard shows a
surplus and we give ourselves permission not to live up to our own moral standards….
just this once.  This is called moral licensing. We often see it when high-profile
televangelists are caught profiting from their parishioners’ contributions, or when
“family values” politicians are caught with prostitutes, or (perhaps) when Christian
football coaches are caught excusing the misdeeds of football players they need in order
to win the next game. The coaching team at Baylor had been praised for their many
successes and their representation of good Christian values. Do you think moral
licensing might have played a role in this scandal? If so, how?
a. Have you ever been guilty of moral licensing? Discuss.
6. Neither McCaw nor Briles looked himself in the mirror one morning and said: “To heck
with the safety of young women. I’ve got football games to win.” But human beings are
amazing rationalizers. We are very good at finding reasons not to live up to our own
standards. A common rationalization in the college sports world, and one that was likely
at play at Baylor, is often referred to as altruistic cheating [for a brief definition, watch:
https://ethicsunwrapped.utexas.edu/glossary/altruistic-cheating]. It doesn’t feel so bad
to cheat or engage in other wrongdoing if we can say to ourselves that we are doing it to
help others and not for purely selfish reasons. Thus, coach Briles could give players a
second chance – players whose conduct had gotten them thrown out of other
universities – by saying: “I feel a duty, a need and a desire to help other people when
things aren’t going their way.” Does the notion of altruistic cheating make sense to you?
a. Could altruistic cheating also have played a part in this scandal? If so, how?









Case Study – Cover-Up On Campus - Page 6 of 6