Discussion Questions:

1) What concepts from the video Intro to Behavioral Ethics are apparent in this case study?

2) Why might the connections among Milbank Tweed, South Street, and Salovaara be conflicts of
interest? Why not? Explain your reasoning.



Case Study - Negotiating Bankruptcy - Page 2 of 3
3) Does it seem irrational for an attorney who has a very promising legal career to not disclose
potential conflicts of interest? If you were in Gellene’s position, what would you have done?
Why?

4) At sentencing, the prosecutor in the Gellene criminal case said that he had prosecuted many
bad people over the years, but admitted “John Gellene isn’t a bad guy.” The prosecutor said it
made him nauseous to see how hard Gellene had been working and suggested that Gellene was
“overstressed and overworked.” Is that an explanation for Gellene’s actions in the BE
reorganization? Why or why not?

5) Gellene had opportunities to correct his errors before they came to light, but did not. How
would you evaluate the following statement from Gellene:

“I’ve been recognized as a person with gifts in terms of my intellect and my ability to
deal with problems and I’ve been very good and very competent at the kinds of
problems presented [by] my clients in the practice of law… And that is I think such a part
of me and who I hold myself out to be and who I am that when I am confronted with a
mistake, an act of inadvertence that is stupid that I’m—it is very difficult for me to stand
up and say I did a stupid thing.”

6) What do you think of the following statement by the judge in the Gellene criminal case:

“I have a substantial amount of contact with my colleagues in law firms to appreciate
that there are incredible pressures in this area that, frankly, sooner rather than later are
going to have to be addressed or we are going to see more cases of this nature being
prosecuted for criminal conduct because lawyers are so focused on other matters…
[W]hen they become so focused to the exclusion of ethical considerations, that is when
the entire system breaks down, the public at large is ever more distrustful.”

7) Based on the two statements above, where do you think the blame primarily lies and why?
With Gellene individually, or with the system within which he operated? Explain your
reasoning.