Discussion Questions:
1. One of the most influential studies of CTE in NFL players found that of 111 NFL players’
brains that were donated for study, scientists diagnosed 110 with CTE (Mez et al, 2017).
But this was not a random sample – the gold standard for research – of retired NFL
players’ brains. These brains had been donated by family members because the players
had been exhibiting adverse symptoms before their death. Is your assessment of these
results affected by the fact that family members donated these brains? If so, why?
Explain.
2. Another recent study performed by the University of Buffalo found no dementia among
21 retired professional football and hockey players who had played for the Buffalo Bills
and the Buffalo Sabres (Willer et al., 2018). But this is a very small sample size, which is
not the gold standard for research. Is this study more persuasive to you than the
previous one?
a. Would your mind change if you learned that the study was funded by a
foundation set up by the founder and long-time owner of the Buffalo Bills? If so,
why?
b. What implications does the self-serving bias have for your assessment?
c. Would you change your mind (again) if the scientists who performed the study
indicated that the foundation played no role in selecting subjects, designing the
study, analyzing the data, or preparing the report? If so, why?
d. Even without such involvement by the foundation, might the scientists have a
subconscious desire to produce results that would please the foundation in
order to pave the way for future funding? Explain.
3. The most influential standards for sports-related concussions come from the Concussion
in Sport Group (CISG), which has published a new set of standards approximately every
five years since 2001. An article by Casper and colleagues in 2021 criticized the CISG
standards for adhering “to a libertarian framing of causality, risk, and intervention,
rather than a precautionary, public health, and patient-centered point of view” (Casper
et al.). They point out that the CISG has been “dominated by individuals with close
relationships to professional and amateur sports organizations.” For example, many of
the CISG’s members have received research support from the NFL, and other sports
organizations like FIFA, the International Olympic Committee, and the International Ice
Hockey Federation. In light of the self-serving bias, how does this make you feel about
the CISG consensus statements? Explain your reasoning.
a. Would your opinion be affected by the fact that the lead author of the Casper
article has been hired as an expert witness by firms representing plaintiffs in
litigation against sports organizations worldwide? Why or why not?


Case Study – Head Injuries & The NFL - Page 4 of 6


4. It has been suggested by Hanson in the Journal of the Philosophy of Sport that NFL team
physicians and trainers are faced with conflicting loyalties. They have a duty to preserve
the players’ health, but can simultaneously feel pressure to get players back out on the
field so the team can win. What is your opinion about how the self-serving bias might
affect the judgments of team trainers and team physicians?
b. Do you see a conflict of interest? Explain your reasoning.
5. The tobacco industry and pharmaceutical industry have long track records of funding
and attempting to influence the results of research regarding their products. In their
research, Bachynski and Goldberg accuse the NFL of doing the same. They give examples
of the NFL pulling funding when researchers refused to remove a colleague who had
been critical of the league from a research project. When the stakes are so high, is such
conduct inevitable? Discuss.
c. How can researchers guard against being unduly influenced or pressured in this
way?
6. The NFL has accused the media of overhyping the dangers of concussions and CTE in
order to sell newspapers and subscriptions. Is this a plausible conflict-of-interest that
could impact the media? Why or why not?
7. What other behavioral ethics biases might be at play here? How might role morality,
overconfidence bias, framing, and loss aversion factor in this situation?