Discussion Questions on the NFL
1.	Many people who are in favor of abolishing football or significantly reforming the way it is played are pro-choice when it comes to abortion, minor drug use, and assisted suicide. Why, then, do you think they oppose letting adults choose freely to play football? 73 Can these contradictory positions be reconciled? Explain.
a.	How about the reverse—why do many people who believe football players should be free to decide what they do with their bodies take decidedly un-libertarian positions on issues such as abortion, marijuana legalization, and assisted suicide? Explain.
2.	Our society allows people to voluntarily choose to undertake many risky professions, including coal miners, fire jumpers, soldiers, underwater oil rig welders, and others.74 Why, then, should NFL players not be able to do the same?
3.	Steve Almond argues that “a civilian leisure class … has created, for its own entertainment, a caste of warriors too big and strong and fast to play a child’s game without grievously injuring one another.”75 Do you think this a moral issue? Why or why not?
a.	Relatedly, should fans of the game be ashamed of themselves? Why or why not?
4.	One suggested solution to the concussion problem is to outlaw helmets on the theory that players will be forced to reduce headfirst collisions and other trauma-causing actions.76 Does this sound like a viable solution to you? Explain your reasoning.
a.	The co-chair of the NFL’s Health and Safety Advisory Committee has said that the committee thinks helmets are part of the culture and tradition and will not be outlawed in the foreseeable future.77 Football’s rules have been changed frequently over the years, so why do you think this is different? Or is it?
5.	Some take the view that the NFL has acted like the tobacco industry did when it was confronted with lawsuits seeking to prove to juries that smoking caused cancer.78 In light of very strong evidence associating football violence with brain injuries, the NFL’s goal has simply been to “manufacture doubt” and thereby delay regulation.79 Do you think that is true? Why or why not? Do you find it to be a moral issue? Explain.
6.	African-Americans make up 12.6% of the American population but 68% of NFL rosters. Thus, they are disproportionately exposed to concussions and other injuries that arise from the game. This has led some to suggest that the NFL is a modern plantation.80 And that concussions present not just a public health issue but also a social justice issue.81 Are these fair criticisms? Discuss your reasoning.
a.	Do you think these critiques are counterbalanced by the fact that the riches that are often lavished upon NFL players go disproportionately to African-Americans as well? Explain.
 
b.	Do you think that the NFL would make more safety-related changes if white players dominated rosters? Why or why not?
7.	It has been suggested at both the NFL and collegiate level that team physicians are faced with conflicting loyalties. They have a duty to preserve the players’ health, but simultaneously feel pressure to get players back out on the field so the team can win.82 What is your opinion?
a.	How might the self-serving bias impact team physicians’ and trainers’ judgments and actions?

Discussion Questions on High Schools & Colleges

1.	In the wake of the recent pandemic, Oklahoma State head football coach Mike Gundy said “In my opinion, if we have to bring our players back, test them. They’re all in good shape. They’re all 18, 19, 20, 21 and 22-year-olds. They’re healthy … And people say that’s crazy. No, it’s not crazy because we need to continue and budget and run money through the state of Oklahoma.”83 One commentator cited this remark as stark evidence that “[t]he supremacy of commercial and hedonic interests over the social welfare has, unfortunately become indelibly imprinted into the ethical fiber of American culture.”84 Do you agree? Why or why not?
a.	Do you see parallels between the debate as to whether to begin playing football again in the wake of the pandemic and the debate as to whether to abolish or reform football in light of the evidence on brain trauma? Explain.
2.	Ramogi Huma, executive director of the National College Players Association, argued that schools should be required to fully inform [college] players about the risks of playing football now, including information about their susceptibilities to underlying health conditions. Do you agree?85
a.	Is this disclosure enough? Explain.
b.	Are college (and high school) players sufficiently mature to make reasoned judgments based on such disclosures? Support your position with data and facts.
3.	Statistician Ted Tatos86 cites the California Supreme Court in University of California v. Rosen as ruling that “[s]tudents are comparatively vulnerable and dependent on their colleges for a safe environment. Colleges have a superior ability to provide that safety with respect to activities they sponsor or facilities they control.”87 Do you agree with this statement? Why or why not? How does it impact your position on the debate about concussions in football?
 
Discussion Questions on Youth Leagues (Under 14)

1.	A public health professor has said that letting pre-teens play tackle football is “an abdication of moral responsibility for children’s welfare.”88 Do you agree, or is this getting a little hysterical? Explain.
2.	Empirical research supports the notion that allowing children to engage in dangerous forms of play is key to their optimal development.89 It helps them learn to assess risks, for example. Based on such findings, philosopher John Russell has argued that children should be allowed to play tackle football.90 He believes in the distinctive value of physically “self- affirming” behavior which he argues is available mainly in childhood. Russell states: “Dangerous sport in its best exemplars, particularly those in which substantial bodily danger is an immediate and ever-present risk, represents an opportunity for confronting and pressing beyond certain apparent limits of personal, and indeed human, physical and psychological capacities in ways not afforded by other normally available human activities.”91 On the other hand, Philosopher Patrick Findler argues that children may not be able to fully realize the dangers they face when playing football, and that other, less dangerous activities, can provide the benefits Russell desires.92 Whose argument do you find more persuasive, and why?
3.	Daniel Goldberg observes that “there is also a crucial social and political question that is not simply a function of that empirical evidence base: to what risks is it acceptable to expose youths and adolescents?”93 Is that risk level different than it would be for older players? Explain.
4.	Would you prevent kids under 14 from playing tackle football? Why or why not?
