Discussion questions:
1. How did this happen? Why did the parents do it? With a couple of exceptions, most of
Singer’s clients led honorable lives and seem unlikely to have paid bribes in order to
advance their own careers or financial situations. But these parents were willing to do
so in order to get their kids into the college of their choice. Is it possible that while
playing the role of “loving parent,” these parents thought they had to do these things to
protect their kids from disappointment and failure? Could role morality have played a
part here? Explain.
2. According to Korn and Levitz, while working with Singer, mother Jane Buckingham
wanted (more than anything) to help her son. Her main thought was: “If there’s
something I can do, I should do it.” Does this sound like a person playing the role of
“devoted parent”? Why or why not?
3. Psychologist Daniel Houser and colleagues ran an experiment where parents were given
the opportunity to cheat under various circumstances. They found that parents were
most likely to cheat when (a) it benefited their children rather than themselves, and (b)
the children were not present. When children were present, parents cheated less,
presumably to model good behavior for their kids. Does this experimental result seem
to accord with the facts on the ground in the Varsity Blues scandal? Explain your
reasoning.
4. Regarding role morality, psychologist Keith Levitt has explained: “When people switch
hats, they often switch moral compasses. People like to think they are inherently moral
creatures – you either have character or you don’t. But our studies show that the same
person may make a completely different decision based on what hat they may be
wearing at the time, often without even realizing it.”  Does this passage help explain
how Gordie Caplan could preach integrity while playing the role of head of a law firm,
yet cheat while playing the role of devoted parent? Or how Doulas Hodge could be a
great philanthropist while playing the role of “good citizen” while being a cheater while
playing the role of devote parent? Discuss.
5. Kweku Adoboli was a trader for UBS who went to jail after sustaining a $2.3 billion loss.
Later Adoboli commented: “I don’t think at any stage I felt guilty of committing a crime,’
he said, ‘Everything I had done was for the bank and for my colleagues.” In other words,
he was playing the role of loyal employee, trying to make a profit for his bank and
therefore felt justified in entering into the unauthorized trades that led to the loss.
Regarding the Varsity Blues scandal, Korn and Levitz wrote:
“[Jane] Buckingham didn’t let herself think much about it. She knew that this was
cheating, even if she wasn’t picturing a federal crime. She told no one. But it also
seemed like a straightforward way to solve a problem. Singer was going to help make
this better. She knew it was wrong but not that wrong, right? [Her son] Jack would just


Case Study – The Varsity Blues Scandal - Page 4 of 5

get into the schools he was supposed to get into if she and Marcus [her husband from
whom she was separated] had been better parents.”
a. Do you see parallels between Adoboli’s playing the role of “good and
loyal employee” and Buckingham playing the role of “devoted parent”?
Explain.
b. How did both use their roles to give themselves permission to do
something they knew was wrong?
6. When parents told themselves that they needed to pay a bribe to prevent their kids
from being crushed by the disappointment of being rejected by their favored school, is it
possible that they were also strongly (if subconsciously) motivated by the
disappointment they would feel if their kids didn’t get into the school of their choice,
and by the desire to claim the bragging rights that go with your kids getting into
prestigious schools?
a. Did the self-serving bias also play a part here? Why or why not?
b. Which do you think was the stronger influence – role morality or the self-serving
bias? Explain your reasoning.
7. Was framing also an issue here? Did the parents’ overwhelming focus on the desired
outcome—admission for their children—push moral considerations out of the parents’
frame of reference when they were deciding whether or not to go along with Singer’s
schemes? What do you think and why?
8. According to Nicole LaPorte: “Singer was ‘good at getting inside these guys’ heads,’ said
one source. ‘He’d talk about famous, wealthy kids who went to certain universities and
say: You think they got in on their smarts.? He made it sound like everyone got into
college through connections and giving money, building libraries.’”  If this is accurate,
might the conformity bias also have played a role here, making the frauds and bribes
seem innocuous to the parents because “everybody does it”? Explain.










Case Study – The Varsity Blues Scandal - Page 5 of 5